docs: how to send metadata to a triplestore (#2510)
SwissDataScienceCenter/renku: docs/how-to-guides/admin/send-metadata-to-an-external-triplestore.rst

.. _admin_external_triplestore:

Create a GitLab pipeline to send Renku metadata to an external triplestore
==================================================================================

> Some users are interested in being able to write their own queries for the metadata in the triplestore. As `Renku<>`’s triplestore contains private data, an alternative solution is to simply export the data to an external triplestore. One way to accomplish this is to use a GitLab pipeline. The following GitLab pipeline configuration can be copied to any project in Renku and used to export triples to a JENA instance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some users are interested in being able to write their own queries for the metadata in the triplestore. As `Renku`’s triplestore contains private data, an alternative solution is to simply export the data to an external triplestore. One way to accomplish this is to use a GitLab CI pipeline. The following pipeline configuration can be copied to the ``.gitlab-ci.yaml`` file in any project in Renku and used to export triples to a JENA instance.
```

        - 'git config --global user.email "yourname@example.com"' # populate this and the following line (name) with a real user. This and the following git steps are only needed if you want to use `renku migrate` 
        - 'git config --global user.name "Example User"'
        - 'git config --global filter.lfs.smudge "git-lfs smudge --skip %f"'
        - 'git config --global filter.lfs.process "git-lfs filter-process --skip"'
        - 'renku migrate --preserve-identifiers' # (optional) ensure that the data going in to jena is using the latest schema 
        - 'renku graph export --full --strict > graph.json' # Only need --full if starting from 0 in jena
        - 'curl -i -u admin:$JENA_ADMIN_PASSWORD -X  POST "https://jenatest.dev.renku.ch/omni-batch-harmony-ds/data"  -H "Content-Type:application/ld+json"     -d "@graph.json"' # send data to your triplestore
        
        
        
The above script will do the following: 

    - Installing dependencies

    - Configure git for the migration of the schema. It might be safer to do a migration manually in order to ensure that the data in the triplestore is using the same schema for all projects.

>     - Export the triples and writing them to a file. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Export the triples and write them to a file. 
```

>     - Send the triples to a JENA instance. In this case the instance is `jenatest.dev.renku.ch` and the JENA dataset is `omni-batch-harmony-ds`. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Send the triples to a JENA instance. Replace ``<server>`` with your triplestore server's hostname. Replace ``<dataset>`` with the name of your Jena dataset. 
```

    
Modify the values
*****************
- Supply the latest versions of the above packages and the URL of your triplestore/dataset. 

> - Set the JENA_ADMIN_PASSWORD variable in GitLab by going to the project page, click on `Settings` -> `CI/CD` -> `Variables` -> `Add Variable`. Be sure to select `Mask variable` so the value doesn't show up in the job logs. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Set the ``JENA_USER`` and ``JENA_PASSWORD`` variables in GitLab by going to the project page, click on ``Settings`` -> ``CI/CD`` -> ``Variables`` -> ``Add Variable``. Be sure to select ``Mask variable`` so the value doesn't show up in the job logs. 
```
